---
date: "2023-11-16T13:47:44Z"
title: Static vs Dynamically Typed Languages
---

The debate around types seems to center around simplicity. Since simplicity is subjective, is the debate merely for show, or do we have anything empirical to base our assertions on? And personally, do I prefer types or no types?

I see types as another form of documentation. I type the dot in the editor and I get suggestions for what comes next in the code. This is types "killer feature". Static type checking helpfully warns me when I'm about to do something dumb. 

Go is static and strongly typed, and mostly stays out of the way until needed.
```
func main() {
	i := 1                                // int
	output := "hello: " + strconv.Itoa(i) // explicit conversion needed due to static typing
	fmt.Println(output)                   // hello: 1
}
```

Try the same thing in dynamic/strongly typed ruby, however, it crashes with no warning
```
def main
  i = 1                  # Integer
  output = "hello: " + 1 # no implicit conversion of Integer into String (TypeError)
  puts output            # hello: 1
end
```

JavaScript is dynamic/weakly typed and runs this with no error and no conversion needed
```
function main() {
  const i = 1;                   // Number
  const output = "hello: " + i;  // Implicit conversion to string
  console.log(output);           // hello: 1
}
```

I find arguments against types difficult to process because of the nature of argument in general. To show that the absence of types is beneficial or that its presence is harmful involves either empirical research, or the elevation of some subjective ideal. There might not be empirical research, and defending the subjective ideal might just derail the argument.

Developers want a good experience reading and writing code. Many languages today owe some of their initial success to not having a type checker. Now many are building type systems of their own. Are type systems inevitable?

